hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for 2024 beginning in early
February and running through June Tammy
and I an assortment of special guests
are going to visit 51 cities in the US
you can find out more information about
this on my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye this rise of this managerial
class you see it in the Deep state in
the federal government the people who
are the political Consultants populating
the industrialization of our political
politics who are neither ordinary
citizens in their own right nor are they
actual purposeful creators but are the
intermediating managers right that's
what's sucking the lifeblood out of our
culture and our country and I would go
so far as to say the modern West as we
know it and so is it possible to reform
that Beast no I think you have to slay
that
[Music]
Beast hello everybody I'm talking again
to VC ramaswami I started talking to Vic
before he ran for president on the
Republican side uh with regard to his
Endeavors on the ESG alternative front
in the financial domain him fighting
back against the climate Apocalypse
mongers in the economic realm I've been
talking to Vic pretty regularly as he's
progressed through the Republican
primaries he's dropped his striving for
the presidency but established himself
quite credibly as a candidate and is
still active as a political voice um we
do a post him of his Adventure on the
political stage talking about the Deep
State talking about his relationship
with Donald Trump talking about his
plans for the future uh talking about
the viability of trump as a candidate um
Trump's divisiveness vivex reasons for
trusting Trump and putting some faith in
a future that might include a four-year
Trump presidency um and walking through
the realities of a modern-day
presidential campaign and so join us for
that hey V thanks for coming on again um
some of the people watching and
listening will know that we spoke well
before you made your bid for for the
Republican leadership in the
presidential race we got to know each
other before then and then you've been
kind enough to take us along on your
journey essentially and we haven't done
that for a while now I know that part of
your political Adventure has come to a
conclusion but I think it would be very
useful for everybody who's watching and
listening to start from the beginning of
of your entry into the political domain
and then just to tell everybody as
clearly as you can what happened to you
and what you what happened to you what
you learned and where you are now so
yeah yeah I'm still processing that and
that's why I was looking forward to this
conversation because even though it's
been a couple months there's a whole ton
of you know transitional to normal life
phase of this that I haven't had my own
chance to process that and hopefully
this conversation is is part of that for
me so you and I actually spoke beforeand
you were one of a small handful of
people I actually spoke to as I was
contemplating this offline but we had
spoken on it before I was a businessman
and I consider myself a businessman now
and I'm thinking about what I'm going to
do in the future trying to drive change
through the private sector I founded a
biotech company that challenged a lot of
the way big Pharma did business I found
it strive to challenge the way Black
Rock and the ESG promoting asset
managers were functioning and those were
successes in their own right in
different ways but I realized the mother
of the beast in each of those cases and
in so many other cases of problems I
hadn't tackled was the administrative
state was that fourth branch of
government the bureaucracy the
technocracy the people who are never
elected to run the government that were
actually exercising political power you
could take the FDA as an example in the
shadow of the pharmaceutical industry
which I had seen firsthand and the not
only the
illogical policies if illogic were the
only part of it it would have been a
technically solvable problem it was a
fundamentally political problem where
people were exercising political power
that they were never given same thing
with respect to the EPA and the SEC in
the case of the asset management
industry and so I came to the conclusion
look life is short one of the best
pieces of advice I got as a younger man
was it takes about as much effort and
difficulty to do something small as it
does to do something big and I've found
over the course of my career that that's
been about true I've done some smaller
things I've done some bigger things both
of which are important but they take
about the same effort if you're doing
something well whether it's something
really small or something really large
the amount of individual effort you put
in is about the same and so look I said
what is the biggest possible impact I
can have if I'm willing to put all my
effort into it it might as well be the
biggest possible impact of all let me
lead the United States of America let me
lead the United States of America to a
rediscovery of our national ideal take
on that administrative state that fourth
branch of government dismantle it to
revive in many ways the ideals of the
American Revolution I mean that's what
the American Revolution was about in
1776 we said no to Elite technocracy in
the form of monarchy it's a 1776 moment
now young people did it back then I was
37 years old when I declared and most
people said that's too young to run for
president the truth is I found that as
encouragement because our founding
fathers including Thomas Jefferson were
younger than me in many cases at the
time they created the entire country so
that's where I was I jumped off a cliff
and didn't know what exactly was gonna
was going to be my landing pad on the
other side let's just say I learned a
lot over the course of that last year
and you know God's plan was revealed it
was not meant to be the next president
of the United States it seems but it did
take me out a journey that at least I
learned a lot from I took a lot away
from and hopefully sets me up to
continue to have a big impact in other
ways in the future
it just was originally my
motivation now couple things I learned I
assumed that it was going to be a
message that people were hungry for I
knew people were hungry for this message
I had written three books I had traveled
the country I had been to Most states in
this Union as a consequence of my
business activities across to the books
I had written and so I knew how people
were responding to this message I
thought of running for president in part
because many people on those book tours
you know tens hundreds of people even
who I didn't know come and encourag me
to run for US president I didn't have
much of a doubt in my mind that that
message was going to resonate with a lot
of people but what I naively assumed was
that somehow that message was going to
land on the ears of the millions of
people who needed to hear it and a that
they were going to hear it at all and B
that when they did hear it that was the
only thing they were going to hear
versus a lot of other messages about me
that would permeate the system and it
turned out to be a a much more
challenging initial incline than I had
envisioned the first thing I noticed was
we planned a you know a big launch of
the presidential campaign a video I had
a Wall Street Journal opet probably I'm
not saying this to boast but one of the
things that I did was probably one of
the most thorough policy vision rollouts
of a presidential candidate on day one
when they roll out their campaign
thought I had done it the right way we
went pretty quickly I only decided in
January of 2023 to run I declared by the
end of February 2024 it was February
21st when I declared and we had a big
leadup to it I think I had done
everything exactly as I had planned to
do laid out the message about as well as
I wanted to and then I noticed that the
world continued to proceed as though I
had never launched my run for US
president including even the political
media that was covering the race another
presidential candidate had declared well
Donald Trump had declared and Nikki
Haley had declared and then by the time
I had declared it was a uh it was as
though it was non-event and so that was
I think the first thing that I realized
was I was prepared to go into this as a
battle of ideas a battle of vision for
the country a battle of who would be the
best person to execute against that
vision and I was sleeves rolled up ready
for battle and then I realized that
people didn't even view me as being in
that battle which I was ended up being
the first battle of the campaign itself
the first five months was making the
case not for my vision not for my
candidacy or my ability to execute but
for my ability to even even be relevant
in the first place and that would be
rather naive of me but but that was that
was I think the first hard learning in
declaring as an outsider for the race
okay so let me draw an analogy there and
you tell me what you think about this um
it's frequently the case that neoy
entrepreneurs who've created a product
believe that the fundamental issue at
hand is the product right it when when I
started selling things into the
marketplace I suffered from the delusion
that it was
85% product and you know 10%
Administration and 5% marketing and
sales and that was like exactly
backwards and so it sounds to me like a
similar issue here that you presumed
that except in the political realm you
presumed that if you had your policy
prepared you were already a credible
person that that would be the bulk of
the initial battle but what turned if
I've got you right what turned out to be
the case was a very sudden realization
that while you had to get in the
conversation at all and that sounds like
a sales and marketing problem to some
degree and this is I think why so many
candidates who are credible turn to
political Consultants so rapidly right
and and that often syns them so okay so
is that a reasonable analogy and you've
but you've you've put products in the
marketplace before and so in principle
you knew that on the commercial side so
well I would say something about this is
I I I agree with you on your analysis on
the commercial side what I would say is
that is on steroids in the political
side right so even if you transpose the
commercial Instinct onto politics you'd
be missing it by by uh by mile the other
thing is I came from industries that
were a little bit different I haven't
really been in a consumer products
industry or in the media industry I mean
the industry that I spent the most time
in was developing drugs for diseases
that Pharma had ignored systematically
and that was an area where look it's
it's a regulated process I saw from a
front row seat how broken institutions
like the FDA really are but it's not an
area where if you're pre-commercial and
everything that I did was in the
research and development phase not in
the commercial phase it actually it as
entrepreneurs go I actually did not
necessarily have that same experience as
many consumer interfacing entrepreneurs
so that may be idiosyncratic to me and
then I would say even for consumer
interfacing entrepreneurs and strive was
a little bit closer to that because
that's that's a that's a you know fund
management company that competes at
Black Rock I had some of that experience
it was nothing close to what the
importance is of that is in politics is
it was all about to call it sales and
marketing in some ways undersells the
problem because sales and marketing is
once you're once you're there how much
do you amplify how many people hear your
message whereas for me at the early
stages of the campaign and as I think
about the last year and even some of the
things that later came back to become
headwinds for me when I was a you know
front running or or whatever top four
top five
candidate were actually the path to
getting there sort of set me up for the
difficulties that I had later on but the
first challenge was not even selling or
marketing your message more effectively
it was literally like nobody would know
that I was running for US president even
though I was running for US president so
it was just getting on the map or being
heard in the first place I just talked
to Dean Phillips and his campaign
obviously came to an end for those of
you watching and listening Dean Phillips
was until recently running against Biden
on the Democrat side and he faced this
problem in Spades I think he probably
faced all the problems you faced plus
the additional problem was that he was
absolutely 100% shut out of the entire
Democrat apparatus people were literally
told that if they worked for him they
would never do anything politically
again in their life and then also he had
to face the same reaction from the
Legacy Media and so he didn't get it and
I don't think that he was attuned well
enough to the alternative media let's
say you know the podcast crowd and all
that to capitalize on that quickly plus
they tend to tilt more in the classic
liberal conservative Direction anyways
okay so you had to face this problem of
getting on the map at all so how did
that unfold
so so one of the things I did and this
is where you know I took good advice you
were one of the early people who offered
a reflection on this and you know I said
what what's the downside in trying it
makes a lot of sense to me is if the
traditional media is ignoring you go to
the non-traditional media as a way to
reach the people and so I adopted a
strategy let's call it a maxim early in
the campaign which was the talk to
everyone and anyone's strategy okay left
right center cable news non-cable news
print media
smalltime media local media individuals
walking on the street recording it and
putting it on social media I wore uh you
I'm wearing a little camera or wearing a
little uh what do you call it a little
microphone right now I wore a microphone
pretty much everywhere I went we just
clip the conversations and put it out
now my social media following was a lot
smaller than than it ended up being at
the end of The Campaign but still that
was just a way of putting out my message
into the world and what we started to
notice was you know most of those things
would get relatively small reach but in
a few instances there were a lot of
interactions where people actually began
to take interest to say wait a minute
that's an interaction of a kind that I
haven't seen before that's interesting
to me some of them were not necessarily
casting me in the most flattering light
I might not have looked good right just
even visually you know the things that I
would have said were sometimes a little
bit unscripted may not have been said as
eloquently as I might have prepared for
in a speech or a TV interview but that
was actually part of what made it
appealing and so that started to take
off I think allowed the campaign there
were a couple moments and then I got
called I happened to be in New York City
and they said do you want to come on uh
Don Lemons show right because many
Republican candidates aren't going to go
on there so they thought they have a
republican candidate who's running why
don't you go ahead and go on Don lemon's
show we had a kind of interaction where
this man lost went haywire I had just
given a speech at the NRA meeting and he
picked on one particular thing that I
said which is a fact of history that
black Americans in the United States did
not get to enjoy their civil rights
until they actually had their second
amendment rights and the first anti-gun
laws that were passed in the United
States were designed to keep gun guns
out of the hands of black Americans and
that was part of a broader historical
Trend where even countries like China or
Iran or other countries around the world
that claim to offer the same Bill of
Rights that the US offers don't have a
second amendment and so Don Lemon and
and the funny thing happened actually I
thought this would be a bit of an aside
but Al offro they said there was a list
of topics see these are the some of the
tricks that the mainstream media plays
it was really interesting there was a
whole Litany of topics they said this is
what they would like to talk to you
about I forget what it was it was
something related to China policy which
you know I I believe the US needs to
deare independence from China they gave
a couple of others but I specifically
remember that being one of them and then
you go on the set and what do you know
is they've pulled a airlifted quotes
from my speech at the NRA meeting with
their own commentary as the wraparound
as the lead into the interview when they
have purposefully given me it's not like
they didn't think about it they said
we're not going to tell you what we're
going to talk about so this is exactly
what we're going to talk about a litany
for a you know relatively new
presidential candidate first time on
their show here's a Litany of what we're
going to talk about and it was not that
it was that they decided to change
Topics in a in a spontaneous way it was
designed as a trap and so in that case
anyway I gave Don Lemon on air a history
lesson which caused him to it ended up
being a big favor for me on the campaign
lose his mind you know the earpiece that
he had in he was screaming at the people
who were the producers in his ears
saying it was distracting him as he was
engaged in this debate with me it was
such an uncomfortable moment for
everybody involved including anybody
watching it that it ended up being the
New York Times reported the next couple
of days later the Catalyst for Don Lemon
actually getting fired by CNN and so I
had a few interactions like that that
that started to kind of increase the
steam behind people at least paying
attention to candidacy and and things
went on from
there did you know a baby's heart begins
to beat at just 3 weeks at 5 weeks that
heartbeat can be heard on ultrasound and
this can sometimes be their only defense
in the womb that's where pre-born steps
in preborn rescues 200 babies every day
from abortion simply by providing
mothers with an ultrasound after hearing
her child's heartbeat and seeing its
perfectly formed body in the womb she's
twice as likely to choose Life by 6
weeks the baby baby's eyes are forming
by 10 weeks a baby's able to suck his or
her thumb pre-born needs our help to
save these precious lives for just $28
you could be the difference between the
life or death of a child and if you
become a monthly sponsor you'll receive
stories and ultrasound pictures of the
lives you helped save all gifts are tax
deductible and 100% of your donation
goes towards saving babies to donate
dial pound 250 and say the keyword baby
that's pound 250 baby or go to pre-born
./ Jordan that's preborn
docomo so let me ask you about well let
me ask you about that so I want to know
what other moments went viral right so
that's a that's a really interesting one
because one of the well there's two
things about that that I find
particularly interesting the first is
the way that these mainstream Legacy
Media journalist set up the people that
they're interviewing so the game seems
to be and this has happened to me many
many times the game is very
straightforward the game is we will poke
and prod at you with ill-informed
but provocative opinions hoping that by
being as annoying as possible you will
say something fatally stupid demolish
your reputation online and elevate my
reputation the journalist as an
investigator who can then walk away with
like your scalp so to speak on his belt
now that's that's a and so that's the
kind of interview you face where every
single word the interviewer utters is a
verbal
trap okay but my my experience has been
that if you keep your head during that
interchange and you don't play the game
so you don't say anything stupid you
don't apologize you don't get upset that
that can turn viciously vicious ly in
your favor and you said okay and so
that's interesting so I'd like to your
thoughts on that and then I'd also like
to know what other things you did in the
alternative media and direct to Consumer
direct to voter model that also went
viral you know some of that's chance
right if you put out 50 Clips you're
going to get a Pito distribution of
effect but did you start to see a
pattern for the clips that you got okay
so let's let's unwrap that let's start
with the gacha journalism first of all
well well the gacha journalism so
strategy ended up being it wasn't really
a strategy I think it's sort of how I'm
wired first was to do exactly what you
said just rationally process exactly
what they're telling you and respond
rationally as the person on the other
side increasingly loses their mind
because you're not doing what they
expected or planned or set you up to do
which in turn I think makes them look I
think far
more illogical as a consequence when
they were actually taking the rafan
populist Republican to try to make fry
of them even for their own audience they
end up looking like the less reasonable
ones I went in The Breakfast Club had a
major viral exchange there where a woman
she was pressing me hard on the fact
that I had only ever really had major
accomplishments in the business world
that had never been in public service
with utter unawareness that the last and
I believe successful president of the
United States Donald Trump came with a
very similar background and I think she
was frustrated that I wasn't falling
into her traps and then she ended up
giving a soliloquy about her her
experience in sixth grade where she put
together a coalition for lunch money or
something like this which to her own
audience which is a largely left of
center audience broadly panned saying
that we don't want to really hear about
your sixth grade experience we
understand that somebody who has
accomplished things in the business
world can at least have a legitimate
case for having his ideas heard this is
coming from the left Don lemon's firing
I had an exchange with Chuck Todd where
he said are you how can you have the
level of certainty that there are two
genders and I explained in manner of
somebody who happens to have a biology
degree which I I don't usually like
using you don't need a biology degree to
know something about biology you don't
need to have a Harvard degree to be able
to have standing to speak on a subject
of science but I have those things and
for an audience that particularly
wrongfully elevates their attachment of
value to those degrees I decided to use
that in my favor and broke down for him
here's what 2x chromosomes mean here's
what an X and A Y chromosome mean and
that exchange went viral as well and I
think this this one was more by chance
but he quickly was was no longer on the
air at Meet the Press which was his made
show shortly after I had done the same
thing with Don Lemon shortly after we
had exchanges like that at The Breakfast
Club and then you think about the
exchanges that I had on social media
that ended up being the ones that really
caught the public imagination were again
interactions that I had in the field
let's call it at the Iowa State Fair at
other places where we had protesters or
people who were purposefully trying to
either disrupt my events or or others I
got to give them credit who were
respectful but sharply disagreed with
what I had to say and approached me in
one-off conversations that weren't
performative but they were real
conversations authentic conversations
between people who deeply disagreed on
subject matter and so if I'm to put
those together both between the
corporate media realm as well as in the
in the let's just say real world
translated social media digital realm
that's the through line that I would
draw is the thing that really ended up
creating
not just oneoff but this ended up being
a series of probably 3 four months in
there of repeated verality of
interactions that were nothing more than
the kind of interactions that I've been
having for all of my adult life which I
enjoy which I thrive on you know think
about the people I went to school with
at places like Harvard or Yale
predominantly had political views that
were different from mine I lean
libertarian most of them lean liberal
some of them are even friends of mine
and remain friends of mine to this day
authentic heated but Earnest Exchange in
some cases the person on the other side
wasn't necessarily authentic in their
motives take the Don Lemon but you treat
them as though they are and then they
self- imilate in front of you that ended
up really lifting up the
campaign in this case now far earlier
than we expected okay because when we
saw me not lifting up off the ground I
think I calibrated myself to saying okay
this is going to be a long haul it's
going to be only after the debates begin
and let me at least try to qualify for
those debates let me at least make that
table Stakes that I would qualify for
the debate
and then after that it would be a steady
build up instead something started
happening where when I took the talk to
everyone's strategy leing media
rightwing media corporate media podcasts
and interactions we actually saw a
pickup That Was Then far earlier than I
expected after I had recalibrated my own
expectations and that created new
problems of its own actually so what
started happening was this is in advance
of the first Republican debate I started
really surging in the polls and that
nobody expected he were talking about
just four months before the media would
not give me the light of day and many
people had no idea I was running for
president when I was running for
president in the month of March now
we're talking about July early
August I mean I was probably the
Republican candidate who was most talked
about even by the corporate press even
when I'm not on there because who is
this character that nobody's heard of
that's now beginning to Surge in a lot
of these polls passing up you know
former vice presidents of the United
States former governors people who were
running that were far more prominent
viewed as real contenders in the
Rays and then that's where I started to
really get a taste of a new a new kind
of issue
where first is I I'll tell this is the
corporate
press I think took some umbrage at the
fact that they had been one uped in two
ways they had been one uped in two ways
one way they had been one uped is right
on their own home turf right the Don
Lemon and the Chuck Todd style
interactions so I think that bothered
him but the second thing that bothered
him and I think this was uh this was I
think the more interesting
learning I think they were bothered by
the fact that I had Sid stepped them
that many of the interactions that
caused me that were most attributable to
Americans having a favorable view of me
had nothing to do with going through the
normal Gatekeepers which are those in
corporate media and this really pissed
them off okay and so what they started
to do was to realize that this was an
opportunity to trap me and and and I
think that this is less about me and
more about a defense of their own
relevance as the sole gatekeeper in the
realm of politics so so this is where I
think that if I was to give you feedback
from the feedback you gave me the
feedback you gave me is sidestep the
corporate media you said that in one of
our earlier podast probably our first
podcast that we had you were one of the
few people who was paying attention to
me here's what I learned as a
consequence of that is we're not yet at
a future where the corporate media is
entirely irrelevant
we're in this Lial State this
intermediate state where the New Media
is relevant it's useful it's necessary
certainly for newcomer break on the
scene like me but it coexists in a
landscape where the traditional
Gatekeepers are still very much present
relevant and important and so they
realize here's the game they're going to
play is take this conversation you and I
are having right this is going to be a
90-minute
conversation thing about a conversation
is it has context what we say 40 minutes
from now may call back something that
you and I just spoke about 10 minutes
ago all right that's the nature of this
format the corporate media operates
television lists take cable television
as example based on two three four
minute segments and so there started to
be a really interesting thing that
started to happen in July and August is
by then there's a whole body of probably
tens hundreds of podcasts like this that
I had done where what they were able to
do was to then helicopter airlift
something that came out of conversation
that had context attached to it right an
hour sometimes two hours worth of
context around a statement but to
airlift that and to put that on air in a
way that was cast in a completely
different context than what it was
intended in the context of a two-hour
conversation and it wasn't that they
were just punishing me what they were
doing in the process was creating a
disincentive for anybody else to
actually participate in those longer
form conversations because the message
is if you do that do it at your own
Peril because you will be punished
unless you do it the standard way where
you script it you don't go through
exactly what the traditional assembly
line is for political communication and
you're going to do it through the format
that we have control over or else we
will punish The Defector and that's what
they began to do so in August in the
lead up to the first debate and this was
this was somewhat damaging to me and it
created a bit of a theme that the other
candidates pounced on and and exploited
as a theme well I'll tell you the
surprising thing that happened at first
debate was remember my whole thing was
in March make the debate stage what
happened is in the summer I surged so
much so that not only did I make the
debate stage I was at the center of the
very first debate stage Ronda Sanz and I
were the two people at the center of
that debate stage one of whom was the
guy who was the pre-ordained Challenger
and replacer of Donald Trump according
to you know many pundits in the world of
conservative media and then another guy
who nobody had heard of at the center of
a debate state with the former vice
president multiple US senators to
Governors to other people who were
irritated as hell that I was there and I
did not expect this dror Peterson but
the thing that shocked me I enjoyed it
was at that first debate I ended up
being the target of every person you
were actually I think in that in that
room physically even and and that was
interesting to me but in the lead up to
that is what really gave them the ammo
and this is where I wasn't strategizing
at all at that point I was just still
continuing my talk to everyone's
strategy I'll talk to everybody I'll
talk unfiltered it's Etc there was a
reporter from the Atlantic this is a
funny story I haven't really gone into
depth on this but I
should there's a reporter from the
Atlantic who has who
has been really asking the Atlantic has
been asking to do a detailed embedded
profile of us you my team and I think
maybe they were a little bit shrewder
than me on this said well we want to be
careful about this I said what the hell
let him in you know we're we talk to
everybody strategy we've committed to
something stick to it practice what we
preach so he came to Columbus Ohio and
then he was going to come on a on a
private flight to whatever campaign
stops we were making culminating the
lead up to the first debate and there
was something funny about this guy I
forget his name okay but the first thing
he says it's a weird it's like bizarre
he has a he has a very mild mannered
affect and he goes out of his way to say
multiple times I have a stutter I was
like okay I don't care if you have a
stutter I mean it doesn't matter to me
but he went out of his way for me to
understand that he had a stutter and he
told my wife and everybody else he met
apologizing profusely I have a stutter
so don't mind me on
this my wife is is it has a wisdom that
I don't but she said just be careful
about this guy because of that fact
right it's not that he had a stutter
it's that he went out of his way to
point that fact out to us that she says
I think he's he's looking to potentially
exploit you just be careful with him I
didn't take it one way or another she
you know ended up being a kaisar so kind
of kind of character is what what for
those of you who who know the movie
reference there anyway he he he he you
know follow me around builds a lot of
sympathetic rapport with me and you know
ends up really somewhat of intellectual
smart guy ended up able to be leveling
with the arguments that I was making
demonstrating his Sympathy for the
essence not just the superficiality but
the essence of the arguments so I feel
like I'm really leveling with somebody
by this point in the campaign we had
learned a lesson so so what my press
secretary she
smartly had the habit of anytime a
recorder is recording the conversation
she also goes on the record and Records
the conversation yeah that's a good idea
on the record let's make it mutually on
the record now she has worked she has
worked had you know 247 for a lot of the
campaign one of the weekends she had she
had to go to a wedding okay and this was
a week this was during the flight that
this gentleman and I were taking to a
campaign stop where we were headed so
now he has me without the uh without my
sort of presid person near me and I
think without without being in recording
he he's got his recorder on the plane
okay so we're talking and I'm foolishly
just you know talking away like I'm
talking to a friend here to a guy who's
already ingratiated himself a little bit
softened His image with me I almost felt
even even a little bit a little bit
saddened for the guy that he had this
loss of self-confidence based on some
attribute that wasn't his own and seemed
like a smart
guy and so we're talking and he he pulls
out so
about two weeks before something had
happened where I was on one of these
podcasts and a guy by the name of Alex
Stein asks me he he's coing kind of a
quasi comedic podcast and he asked me do
you believe what the governments told
you about 911 and I said do I believe
everything governments told me about 911
well the reality is we know the
governments lied to us based on
Declassified documents that came out 20
years after 911 that Omar albumi who was
a individual who was previously deemed
To Be A 42-year-old graduate student
that randomly met two of the hijackers
that was the story that the 911
Commission and the FBI published 20
years ago turned out in the Declassified
documents 20 years later was a Saudi
intelligence operative so we know the
government lied about that so based on
that hard fact of course the we don't
believe everything the government has
told us about this now that statement
was the fodder it's the classic move
take something in the context of a
podcast style conversation airlift that
to the conversation about okay so here's
the conversation we had on the airplane
he says all right I believe the
government should tell the truth about
what we know about what happened on
January 6th and that's something I have
been very vocal about during the
campaign I think government should tell
us everything everything's fair game
were there FBI agents in the field tell
us were there FBI agents in the field
were there FBI informants in the field
just answer the question transparently
most of the mainstream media throughout
the campaign has said that the FBI
director has said there were none
actually that's false Christopher Ray
when he's responding to Congress refused
to answer the question which the media
has then later reported as saying that
he said there were none so I said '
whatever is just tell us the truth and
so we have a detailed must be a
20-minute conversation easily about my
view on the government's obligation to
just be transparent whatever it is just
let the public tell the truth publish
all the video footage don't disclose
some video footage and high others just
tell the public the truth We the People
deserve the truth so then he asked me
okay well were there federal agents in
the field on January 6 you know do you
think it's a fair question to say were
their federal agents on the plane on 911
now this is I mean this is a looney idea
right nobody this is not out a shred of
evidence for this but in the context of
my principled answer saying that for
January 6th or for anything else the
government should just tell the people
the truth said look the government
should tell the people the truth
whatever it is I have no reason to
believe that there were federal agents
on the plane it's a ridiculous idea to
think there were but whatever it is the
government should tell the truth to the
people okay on that on that segment and
it was one snippet of a maybe a 30
minute conversation on this topic which
is a broader two-hour conversation
during a flight
the story comes out this is right on the
eve of the debate okay and the story
comes out from the Atlantic it's in a
detailed story goes into a lot of other
things the one thing that the editor-in
chief or whoever the main editor guy is
at the Atlantic puts out and highlights
is ramaswami fuels conspiracy theories
asking whether there are federal agents
on the planes on
911 so this is weeks later after he's
come so I truthfully like I remember the
January 6 conversation this was a
one-off snippet I didn't remember saying
that and I just told my team I was like
I don't I don't remember saying that I
mean clearly these people have reporting
standards he was recording a
conversation he's reporting on something
can you just ask the
Atlantic just share with us the
recording where I said it just from my
own knowledge of what I even said it was
a free flowing conversation I'm not
denying the way I was quoted but just
tell me what I said they refused to Now
CNN this comes full circle from the Don
Lemon has their own Vengeance to square
has booked me that night okay and and
boy are they coming ready and I'm sure
there's coordination it was it was done
in a level at which it would be hard to
believe there's not some level of
coordination here so CNN's booked me
that night and they asked me the
question so so I know I'm going to get
asked about this so I'd like to know so
we just respectfully asked the Atlantic
what did I actually say just tell me
what what do you have what's the thing
that you're quoting here in the article
because then the article goes on there's
a bunch I'm being panned across the
Spectrum left and right at this point
and they refused to provide it so I go
on CNN and she says you know why did you
say why are you saying that there could
have been Federal officers on the plane
on 911 so I've never thought such a
thing it's a rid it sounds to me like a
ridiculous proposition so I say look I
don't think I said that I think I was I
was misquoted or taken out of context
that's the truth of it and I think that
what I did not realize is that's when
they knew they had won cuz she went out
of her way to say oh I take you your
word there okay what they had then
within hours of that interview airing
the Atlantic slices just that portion
where he's questioned me after the
detailed discussion about January 6
would it be fair for the government to
ask the question of where their were
their agents on the plane on 911 just
release that snippet and then CNN and
the entire media has a field day cuz the
entire slogan of my campaign is speak
the truth right speak the truth when
it's easy when it's hard truth is the
one word slogan of my campaign they use
this to damage the hell out of me and so
I asked the Atlantic we said publicly
you release the snippet why don't you
release the entire conversation why
would you to this day they haven't done
it and to this day I will challenge them
if you want to be honest Arbiters of it
CNN the whole next day running an entire
field day saying that he said I have and
if you listen to the exact footage it's
even different than the describe it the
exact footage is sure I think the
government should tell the truth I have
no reason to believe there were it seems
like a ridiculous idea that there should
be but whatever it is the government
should tell the truth that's what I said
which they summarize as saying that I'm
raising conspiracy theories that there
were federal agents on the plane on 911
ridiculous now you now you attribute
that to so let's go into the attribution
so obviously this was somewhat shocking
for you shocking yeah okay so now but
you you've already set up some uh
diagnosis of the motivation you said
that as far as you were concerned the
Legacy Media wasn't very happy with you
sidest stepping them let's say even
though at that point you didn't really
have an alternative they also weren't
very happy with the fact that their
attempts to pigeon hole you let's say
had backfired quite spectacularly and
then you had this character from the
Atlantic who played I'm I'm your friend
while you invited him in only to try to
find um one of these situations where
something you said could be taken out of
context to Savage your reput
but but but but there there's the rub
like why exactly is it is it just the
additive combination of the reporter
wants to make a name for himself the
Atlantic wants to have a story CNN wants
to capitalize on it along with the fact
that well it would be lovely to throw
some dirt on a republican because what
the hell why not and to paint him with
this right-wing conspiracy theory like
is that sufficient is that the causal
explanation for the manner in which that
laid itself out and then we'll get back
to what effect that had at the debate
yeah so I don't think it was sufficient
all those things were were definitely
factors but I think this was in the
context of something is going as it's
not supposed to here okay there's a guy
here who is
advancing a trumpian worldview of
positive I think of it as a positive
nationalism but nationalism nonetheless
in the United States and he is defying
our expectations for what that's
supposed to look like because he speaks
in a manner that is at least as I'm not
saying this about myself I'm saying this
what I think they see in me as audite
and educated from the halls of the same
Ivy League colleges that they that they
deemed to be their esteemed institutions
and speaking in a manner that goes
toe-to-toe on the facts with debating
so-called the science on issues relating
to covid policy or otherwise that we're
unable to contend with this is a real
threat we need to go after this in a
deeper way because he's not given us the
video clips from speeches that we can
caricature we need to actually set the
traps and this needs to be quashed it
needs to be quashed now and by the way
this social media thing that's sidest
stepping us to hell with that that's
creating the disinformation that's
creating the alternative the
misinformation that allows candidates
like this to rise it is our job and our
social responsibility as a media
institution to extinguish that
possibility let's punish his ability to
do that by lifting some of the comments
he's made in those lwd settings offline
from the traditional media that
individual citizens are beginning to
access to their own Peril and set the
record straight for how this is done
were're the people who vet who actually
become serious presidential candidates
when he's a non-serious contender who
cares but this guy's rising in the polls
to become a serious presidential
candidate could really have an impact in
shaping public opinion we have an
ability and a responsibility to make
sure that doesn't happen cut his legs
off I think was exactly what happened
and then you have the industrialized
politics in a Republican primary where
that provides the fod for other
candidates who were frustrated by the
same thing happening to be able to use
that to their advantage not even the
candidates but in many cases even the
super Pacs supporting them which is part
of this industrialized cess poool of the
modern industry of American politics
that's really what
happened starting a business can be
tough but thanks to Shopify running your
online storefront is easier than ever
Shopify is the global Commerce platform
that helps you sell at every stage of
your business from the launch your
online shop stage all the way to the did
we just hit a million orders stage
Shopify is there to help you grow our
marketing team uses Shopify every day to
sell our merchandise and we love how
easy it is to add more items ship
products and track conversions Shopify
helps you turn browsers into buyers with
the internet's best converting checkout
up to 36% better compared to other
leading e-commerce platforms no matter
how big you want to grow Shopify gives
you everything you need to take control
and take your business to the next level
sign up for a $1 per month trial period
at shopify.com jbp go to shopify.com jbp
now to grow your business no matter what
stage you're in that's shopify.com
jbp okay so now I was there as you said
for that debate and so let me offer you
some observations and then respond to
them and and you can tell me you flesh
that out so first of all all I spent a
lot of time working with Democrats in
the US and I've pulled back on that
attempt in over the last two years I
would say because I got tired of having
to walk on eggshells with absolutely
100% of everything I said all the time
the the idea was to attempt to pull the
Democrats on the moderate side away from
the radical progressives who they're so
foolishly aligned with and against whom
they refuse to erect any barriers
whatsoever and so I've spoken to a lot
more Republicans more recently and I
found that a lot more straightforward
even when we don't see eye to eye I
don't have to watch what I say and
there's almost always a genuine exchange
of information now when I went down to
where was the where was the debate where
was it held the first one was in um I'm
losing track here uh I I know the stage
it was in it was in of course in in in
Wisconsin that was where the in yes okay
so I was actually I was impressed with
the the field of candidates that the
Republicans had offered I thought that
the debate was the debate was more
rigorous and intellectually engaging
than I expected it to be it was a real
spectacle in the American sense and you
Americans are unbelievably good at that
and so it also had that but then it was
interesting watching you because what I
saw was that first of all you were a
focus of attention for the rest of the
candidates not the only one but
certainly our focus of attention I think
it does reflect what you just described
and you also elicited more positive and
more negative response from the audience
than any of the other candidates right
and so now and so I'm interested in in
the personal element of that this
was I'm not exactly sure what it was
like for you to be on the stage with
these political heavyweights comparative
political heavyweights let's say and
holding your own it wasn't much before
that where it was not as not written in
stone that you were even going to be
part of the debate so this is very new
for you so what do you what did you
think of the other people who you shared
the stage with um what do you think you
did well and and what do you think you
did well and what would have you liked
to have improved with regard to your
performance for that particular
event yes so I'm still reflecting on a
lot of this and I haven't landed on firm
conclusions yet but I can tell you you
know some maybe Half Baked you know or
some some some incoit Reflections here
okay I went into that feeling a great
sense of Liberation and fun that was my
strategy okay and we even we even put a
fine point on that you know I was
playing hours of tennis and working out
and we put out some videos on social
media you know almost
mocking the process to be honest with
you it was a little smug of me to do it
I have to admit that but I
had it was it was a smugness that I kind
of acquired as a little bit of a defense
mechanism against what was already a
poisonous system by that point right you
have a media that systematically ignored
me and then finding my way to prominence
nonetheless with the actual voters
sidest stepping the media which is no
easy thing to do systematically punish
the super packs of the other candidates
in the leadup to that presidential
debate I mean you had you know I mean
I'm not picking on anybody here but you
take Nikki Haley Mike Pence all of their
political Consultants you know lot Ronda
sanz's machine basically every other one
this is all public record were in the
leadup to the debate online and
otherwise issuing directed criticisms
towards me foregrounding what was coming
on the debate stage and so I kind of
entered the moment with and I don't hold
that against the other candidates just
how this game is played but I entered
that uh stage with the feeling of
somewhat of a sense of disdain for the
process the industrialization of this
and what I saw were the products of it
which were in many cases other
professional politicians I had a sense
of
disdain I also had a sense you said you
pointed to the fact that some of that
might have been defensive you know
because I think so I think so right
because I think okay well it's very
interesting because that's a common
defensive reaction but it definitely has
dangers especially when you're in
engaged in the process right I mean it's
a weird thing because you're part of it
clearly part of it and then you can see
where it goes sideways and you have to
criticize where it goes sideways but
you're still in you're in the game and
so you can't be contemptuous of it
because what the hell are you doing in
the game if you're contemptuous of it so
that's real it was it was it was it had
a layers of paradox to it so so even in
the leadup to the debate as others were
attacking me my mode was let me not just
attack them and the lead up to the
debate but let me in as you know I would
say it was pretty condescending manner
putting out here's my debate prep and I
put out a shirtless video of me playing
tennis we're we're working out we're
doing all kinds of fun things and kind
of saying one of these is not like the
others and and it was it had a certain
contempt to it I I'll admit that it had
a it had a
contemptuous tenor to that heading into
the debate which of course only threw
fuel on the fire and the irritation of
the existing system and to some extent
the other candidates as well so that
might have also that might have also
accounted for the of course expanded
emotional response he because when you
said positive things the crowd was very
enthusiastic but I suspect now now that
you've told me this I suspect that the
more exaggerated negative response was
probably a crowd reaction to that to
that leaking in of disdain you yes
absolutely and and I'm you know we're
we're being uh pretty pretty unfiltered
here but I think that it's a good thing
for people to be able to see behind the
curtain a little bit of what is
otherwise a shrouded process so so
anyway we start this we start the debate
and I'm going in that night I'm not one
to be naturally prepped in this setting
and so there was some minimal amount of
prep that I did which felt very
unnatural to me and so the day of I just
made a decision I'm G to have fun I'm G
to have fun one or another it's a hell
of an experience as this is a life
experience and I'm going to just speak
in a pretty unfilled aled way and I'm
going to be a fighter like we feels like
you're going into an arena you're you're
going to have a fight roll up your
sleeves in a little bit of a gladiator
Spirit having fun when you're going in
there don't play with kid gloves bring
your brass knuckles and let's go have a
fight and I think that that's the tenor
I was in going in there and so I think
from that point in the campaign forward
right that effectively became my modus
opendi first was nobody was relevant
nobody viewed me as relevant not even
hearing my ideas second phrase is
they're hearing my ideas but in a
actual I would say I hope I tried to be
respectful manner with the Left Right
the people who are actually
ideologically on the other side that
created this this ground swell of
verality which then caught the entire
political system The Establishment in
the Republican political industry which
is different from actual Earnest
candidates and the mainstream media by
storm the arrows then start coming in
somewhat is a defense mechanism and
somewhat because I didn't see a better
alternative I just said okay well I'm
just going to fight I'm going to take
the take the gloves off and I'm going to
be a fighter for the rest of this and
I'm going to have fun while I'm at it
ended up being my attitude going into
that first debate and what we saw and I
think that was basically the tenor from
there for the second half of the race
was me being somebody who
was I didn't I didn't proactively hit
anybody who uh hadn't hit me but my rule
from on was if you're going to hit me
because it had just begun to you know I
it wasn't relevant now it's relevant but
the relevance came in the form of being
hit whoever it is Republican Democrat
media I don't care if you hit me I'm
going to hit you back 10 times harder
and I'm going to be unsparing about it
and that's what effectively that first
debate ended up being it's what most of
the remaining debates ended up being it
won me a lot of fans I will say the fans
who loved me for doing it still ended up
voting for who they saw the ultimate
figh of all which is Donald Trump but
they loved me as their second choice and
I think in many of the polls what we saw
by the end was the second choice ranking
to Donald Trump I'd be number one in the
rest of the field but that still left me
with only 8% of the vote in in Iowa 7.8%
of the vote in Iowa but it did actually
probably lose me a lot of other
supporters from the remainder who
actually once they were finally hearing
my ideas which keep in mind for the
first half of the race they hadn't but
by definition once they really heard my
ideas they were actually prepared to
latch on to that but were put off by the
pugnacious way that I handled the way
that I was getting hit and so that's the
real story of the reflection as I said
it's still not I'm still in the process
of reflecting on much of what happened
last year there's the first kind of
conversation like this that I've had
reflecting on it but I think that's
effectively what happened is I was
unconstrained I was a fighter and I'm
proud of being a fighter I think we need
a fighter who leads for the country but
I think we need more than that too and I
believe I bring more than that but the
formats that I was given in that latter
half of the race allowed for people to
see that I am a fighter and that I am
and I'm proud of it and I won't
apologize for it but there was no other
forum for people to see the other
dimensions of my ability to be a leader
and dare I say a uniter for the country
other than in-person settings of 50 to
200 people at a time which is what I
ended up gravitating to in that latter
half of the race in those final months
of the race I ended up doing you know
hundreds of events in Iowa which I was
the life was experience of a Lifetime by
the way I mean this was really probably
some of the most emotionally challenging
and testing period I've been through
where I'm not approaching these with
canned lines right I'm treating each
interaction with somebody at a Pizza
Ranch in Iowa as though it's the first
time I'm answering that question that
was the standard I held myself to so
every day you're waking up at 7:00 a.m.
in some cases 11 events over the course
of a day you'd be going to bed at
midnight the next day do it again did
more events in Iowa than the rest of the
field combined I ended up resorting to
that because that was a setting in which
for the people who saw me there which
ended up being a tiny portion of the
electorate I think the feedback I would
get right because we would do photo
lines Whenever there was a Whenever
there was an opportunity I would stay
till the very last person had left the
number one piece of feedback I heard and
and I didn't know how to take this well
was you're really different than what I
thought of you coming out of the debates
and not not everyone meant it in a bad
way or a good way but it was just
genuinely fascinating to people that
okay like this is a different side of
you that I did not see when I saw you at
the debates and I think most people
meant it in the sense that the people
who were in those rooms say I wasn't
necessarily thinking about voting for
you I was intrigued based on what I saw
in the debates I wanted to meet you I
didn't think I was going to vote for you
but I'm going to vote for you now the
issue is you're talking about a few
thousand people Max that you touch that
way right if you're just talking about
individual events of 50 to 100 people at
a time and that just wasn't enough to
win an election that's mostly decided by
people who are accessing their
information in ways other than showing
up in the middle of a blizzard or a
winter at a Pizza Ranch in Iowa and so
that was you know in a nutshell I think
a a summary of of the trajectory of the
year and some of the things I learned in
the process and you know there's a
million small things I probably would do
differently if given the opportunity
again just the first time of course I I
would have expected that and it is the
case that there are a million small
things I would have done differently but
in a big picture sense am I grateful
that I ran and took the risk and bore
the
cost financial and nonfinancial
associated with doing it yes I am
brought our family closer together it's
probably one of the most important
things that I did is so so you were one
of the few people I talked to before I
ran one of the people I talked to also
before I ran for genuine advice when I
was thinking through I was inclined to
do it but I wasn't certain yet was
actually talking to Tucker Carlson
beforehand and he gave me probably the
two simple best piece advice he didn't
have much by way of advice but he had
two pieces of advice that were gold I
think the first he said was whatever
your personal bubble is so your family
environment your closest friends travel
with that and keep them around you and
that will keep you ground it was very
practical but that actually was really
good advice we ended up doing it as a
family he said hold yourself to a
standard right and and he for each
person this will be different what he
told me but here's what he said is do
whatever would make your wife proud of
you okay and he said it with a smile on
his face but not as a joke as as a
serious matter so so it's a certain
sense that assumes that you're with a
life partner and you and I have talked
about this before for I one of the
things I'm blessed with in my life is to
actually have found my soulmate and to
be married in in married to my soulmate
is something that is not something that
everybody gets to say but I think Tucker
told me do something that makes make
sure everything you do makes your wife
proud travel with your friends and
family around you so that you don't get
sucked into the circumstance of waking
up in some sort of muddied haze
wondering where I am on a given day and
then becoming some alternative version
of yourself a lot of people get sucked
into doing that don't it I followed both
those pieces of advice and I think that
that made the process one that I'm
grateful for regardless of the fact that
it didn't achieve the result that I
intended which was to be the next
president of the United States it
brought our family closer together it
brought me in closer touch with my own
convictions I think you're tested on a
daily basis I probably came out of that
year with an even greater certainty of
my own convictions than I went into it
with I thought I had high conviction
going in
but you don't really understand your own
convictions until you've been tested and
in a few instances dare I say it even
had convictions that were slightly
different than where I began the
campaign with and for anybody else who
didn't go through that experience
without having their views modified in
some way means you're probably not a
person who's open
to open to reflection I mean you can't
be challenged on a daily basis for a
year without having your own own views
sharpened along the way and so I think
our family is stronger for it my views
and my convictions are stronger for it
didn't achieve the intended result but
it does give me a greater and renewed
sense of purpose and Mission to still do
whatever I can to save this country even
if it's not going to be as the next
president and I'm grateful for that at
the end of it there's lots of places we
can go from there but I I want to go
let's try two to begin with the first
I'm curious about I've been going
through the biblical stories in my on my
tour and in this new book I'm writing
and Moses in that book is the archetype
of the of a leader that's what that
story is about and Moses is seriously
punished by God for reverting to power
when invitation and explanation would
suffice that's his temptation right and
you could imagine that that's the
temptation of a political leader is
especially as your reputation grows the
club that you can wield gets larger and
larger as you're more and more
influential and so I'm wondering if that
proclivity that you described for that
tilt that that Temptation
towards disdain and fighting back you
know I I'd like to unack that a little
bit more
because you you lay out a very clear
clear case for why that all emerged but
then you also said that to some degree
that interfered with people's ability to
see who you were on the really on the
leader front rather than on the fighter
front let's say and I'm not saying I
know how to negotiate that because I
don't it's obviously an extremely
complicated space
but so let's let's assess that in
reflection do you think there are ways
that you would conduct yourself going
forward if you replicated your adventure
and then I'd also like to delve more
into your relationship with Trump
drawing on something that you did say
earlier you know you you you said that
perhaps part of the reason the Legacy
Media went after you was because they
saw you providing the same
attractive message to say disaffected
workingclass Americans that Trump
managed except you could do it in a
manner that was int actually credible
now you you were careful during your
campaign in my estimation to not poke
the bear that's Trump or his followers
for that matter and so I'd like to
explore your relationship a bit more
with Trump and I'd also like you to
comment a bit more on that contradiction
between fighting and pushing and laying
out of an attractive in Invitational
vision
yeah so I'll start with that latter
piece it's a hard thing to do and I I
don't see a particular for myself at
least a point
to relitigate you know what I would have
done differently you know I think
circumstances in some
ways in some ways it's hard to imagine
it going any differently because the
path that led there was the entire path
that I walked through in our
conversation
it was almost unavoidable because at
that point if I if I it was a sort of
damned if you do damned if you don't
situation because I put myself in a
situation which was the only way to get
on the map that had invited the level of
arrows that I was taking from the other
candidates from the media and you know
from the traps that were laid and from
the political industrial complex that if
I didn't hit back I'd be too weak to be
the president of the United States and
wouldn't deserve that job and there was
no other way other than to hit back and
hit back hard but the window of formats
that reaches people is sufficiently
narrow that it doesn't allow for
multiple aspects of a personality to
come through right so you're going to
you get you get one label you're able to
get through to the people in the mediums
that are available to you in the media I
don't really mean in just the corporate
media but the collective mediums that
are available to you fighter was the one
that came through and so could I have
done it differently I don't know I I
certainly was was unable to cuz the
truth is I am a fighter but I'm not just
a fighter but that's what came across
when people were finally paying
attention to the candidacy and the
reality is and and understandably so for
many voters if you want a fighter in the
White House take the one who's proven
who has taken more arrows far more than
I have and overcome them that was Donald
Trump which was many of the people who
loved me the most I mean like really
love me as as supporters like the people
who are guys who were maybe coming to 15
20 events that I held in Iowa people who
are enthusiastic supporters speaking
still caucus for Donald Trump right and
and I don't blame them for it because if
what you see is the value proposition is
here's a young fighter who's going to
fight for me and fight for this country
just as hard as he fights to defend
himself against the treacherous media
and political industrial complex I love
that and I'm going to vote for Donald
Trump because he has proven at a scale
that nobody has that that's guy who's
going to be able to do it so that's
that's what ended up happening there but
on a go forward basis I guess the
differen is and I I I don't know what's
next for me the truth is I'm keeping a
very open mind the only criteria is have
an impact on the country that's positive
and not small as I said it takes as much
effort to do something small as it does
to do something big large scale positive
impact in Saving this country and
Reviving who we are whatever I do next
it's going to fit that description but
let let's say let's say that there was a
you know a replay of it but you're
starting from where we left off right
this last time I'm not starting from the
place I did last yeah right right and so
you're not it's one thing to fight for
relevance and then fight to be perceived
in the right way if you're starting to
already from the place of relevance but
then the question is just making sure
people understand who you really are you
know in some ways you can't it's like an
algebra problem right you can you can
only solve for one variable with one
equation at a time and so in some ways I
was with one equation the one linear
race trying to solve for both two
variables one of relevance and the other
one of actually being seen the correct
way you had to kind of pick
one sleep is a foundation for a mental
and physical health in other words
you've got to have a consistent
nighttime routine to function at your
best but if you're struggling with sleep
then you've got to check out Beam Beam
isn't your run-ofthe-mill sleep aid it's
a concoction carefully crafted to help
you rest without the grogginess that
often accompanies other sleep remedies a
bunch of us here at the daily wire count
on beam's dream powder to knock us out
and sleep better through the night so we
can show up ready for work the next day
just mix beam dream into hot water or
milk stir or froth and then enjoy before
bedtime then wake up feeling refreshed
without the next day grogginess caused
by other Sleep Products dream contains a
powerful allnatural blend of RI
magnesium eleanine appenine and
melatonin to help you fall asleep stay
asleep and wake up refreshed and with it
now being available in delicious flavors
like cinnamon cocoa chocolate peanut
butter and mint chip better sleep has
never tasted better and today listeners
of this show can get a special discount
on beam's dream powder get up to 40% off
for a limited time when you go to shop
beam.com Peterson and use code Peterson
at checkout that's shop
for up to 40%
off well look you look you did you did
put yourself on the map that was a
success and you're not very old and
there's no reason from a bird's eyee
view to assume this is your kick at the
can it I don't feel having watched what
you did that you're exhausted as a
political candidate especially given how
young you are right okay okay so so so
you know maybe you maybe you laid the
groundwork for something that could
emerge in the future now there's a
variety of ways that could go everyone
can see that you've had a fair bit of
interaction with Trump after the after
your run for presiden
uh you know came to its end everyone of
course is wondering what that might hold
in the future
um what's your sense of what you could
bring and might bring to the table
assuming that a trump
presidency is realized in November well
the first thing I would say is I think
it would be a mistake to just rest on
one's Laurels as a candidate and assume
that is the outcome so the first thing
I'm focused on is making sure that we do
have a trump presidency in November
doing everything I can traveling
different parts of this
country campaigning for Trump not just
through the primary which is now you
know effectively and has been for a
while over but in the general election
against Biden reaching young voters
reaching non-traditional voters I mean
even you think about asian-americans or
indian-americans I think 70% went the
direction of Biden last time around
despite the fact that their Valu is
almost undoubtedly more aligned with the
pro Excellence agenda that Trump stands
for now young people in this country who
are starving for purpose and meaning
we've talked about this in our last
episode that we did together well the
left isn't providing that or they're
satisfying it with the equivalent of
fast food with race and gender and
sexuality and climate a positive
nationalistic Vision that says that you
know what this is a country that is the
greatest country known to mankind and
you have an opportunity not only to live
here but to contribute to this country
and pass that on to the Next Generation
that Civic sense of Duty fills what many
young people are starving for and I
think that that's far more aligned with
the message Trump is delivering than the
nonsense they're hearing from Biden or
the other side and so my focus in the
near- term is don't take some outcome
for granted make sure that Trump is
elected as the next president do
everything I can in my power to make
that happen and in the meantime you know
if there are opportunities to continue
to drive positive change through the
private sector as I was doing before I
ran for president let me have added the
perfect opportunity to do it I mean
strive is a company I co-founded as you
know to push back against the ESG
movement I'm incredibly proud of
progress which is going very well
P I'm very proud of stries
accomplishments and I and and mentoring
some of the other businesses that I've
co-founded to have positive impact
for-profit nonprofit through the private
sector a lot of ways to drive change and
then make sure that that electoral
outcome is what it is in November I
think that's actually the top objective
and one of the things I found in my life
at least is when you make
these elaborate personal plans right you
know if this happens then I'm going to
do that thing and if the other thing
happens then I'm going to do the other
thing and if that doesn't happen then
here's my plan
B at least in my life I've learned that
your plans are stupid okay at least
maybe not yours but mine my plans are
stupid and so I'm Guided by my purpose
that's great the plan will reveal itself
but the purpose is the same one that I
entered the race with which was to
revive who we are Revive Our missing
national identity and
self-confidence pass that on to my kids
and their generation I volunteered to do
it as the next president the people of
this country made clear certainly in the
Republican party and I think far beyond
that that they want Donald Trump to do
that job thankfully his ideology is you
know very similar to mine in terms of
what it means to advance an America
First agenda and so I've put all my
energy into to making sure that Donald
Trump is elected the next president the
reason I support Trump is because I
support America First values because I
support this country it's not the other
way around but that's I think the reason
most people who support Trump feel that
way and I view it the same way is we're
going to do whatever we can to revive
our country the number one most
impactful thing we can do is have a US
president that shuts down and
eviscerates much of that managerial
bureaucracy in the federal government
that revives our sense of national pride
does some basic things that Americans
across the political Spectrum agree on
from shutting the border to Growing the
economy I clearly believe that Donald
Trump is the man to get that job done
and I'm going to make sure that he
succeeds at it okay so your next your
next party your next plan is okay is to
continue the campaign and now you made
reference back to the way we started our
conversation and so let's pursue that a
little bit I'd like to know more about
what you now know or believe you know
about the political industrial complex
right I mean you said that you got into
the race to begin with because you were
concerned about the proliferation of
something like a midlevel tyranny right
which I think is something that we're
seeing all around the world it's a
collusion between mid-level State actors
they're usually not elected they don't
have to face the electorate they're not
on the hook for their own economic
survival because they're paid
bureaucrats they've extended their
domains radically at every level of
political
organization um and I think part of the
reason that the magot types who are
firmly behind Trump are behind Trump is
because they feel in their bones that
Trump is enough of a bowl in the china
shop to actually pose a challenge to
that system um so I would like and the
you know the example of the Argentinian
current Argentinian president keeps
popping into the back of my mind because
he's doing the kind of radical Cuts in
Argentina that that musk did for example
at Twitter and so I would like to know
first of all do you actually think now
that you've seen this the system per se
operate at close hand do you think that
it's actually possible for a candidate
even Trump who's only got a fouryear
mandate which is not very long to have
the power no have the ability to make a
difference in this in relationship to
this unbelievably entrenched widespread
system so I'd like to know how you feel
about the political industrial complex
that you've now come up against and are
also now a part of right peculiarly
enough peculiarly enough and isn't that
interesting how that
works I would say it's not possible to
reform it it is possible to decimate it
okay I think and that's what it's going
to require this rise of this managerial
class you see it in the Deep state in
the federal government or the fourth
branch of government the UN eled
bureaucrats who are unties but you
exactly it's not just in the Deep State
it's the manager class the associate
dean of God knows what the Ambassador
under secretary to something or other
the people who are sitting
professionally on a board of directors
the people who are the political
Consultants populating the
industrialization of our political
politics it's a horizontal managerial
class who are neither ordinary citizens
in their own right nor are they actual
purposeful creators who are able to
create something of inherent value but
are the intermediating managers right
that's what's sucking the lifeblood out
of our culture and our country and I
would go so far as to say the modern
West as we know it and so is it possible
to reform that Beast no I think you have
to slay that beast and I think it is
possible for a chief executive you could
take it of a university you could take
it of the country of the executive
branch of the United States of America
of a company you could go one by one but
but for a strong chief executive who is
at least least on paper vested with the
authority to run an organization to take
what's on that piece of paper and
actualize it to actually run that
organization and the system isn't set up
for it it isn't set up for a political
candidate to really run their campaign
it's done by the industrialized machine
around them it isn't set up for the
chief executive of the Executive Branch
the president of the United States to
run that executive branch or that
bureaucracy it's not naturally set up
that way and it's not set up for the
President of University to run the the
you know endless Committees of of
associate Deans it's the committee class
that permeates each of these
institutions even for large Fortune 500
companies you might have HR heads who
are exercising greater hiring policy
decisions than the CEO so that's not the
default but it takes the kind of
executive who will overcome that
activation energy to say I'm going to
break that system anyway I'm I'm not
going to fall for the siren song of
saying that I can reform it reform isn't
possible but will I take the risk and it
is a risk and there will be costs to it
of saying I'm not bringing some sort of
chisel I'm bringing a chainsaw a
jackhammer to the whole thing raising It
To The Ground burning it and then
burning the ashes and then and then
start with a blank slate and build a new
if I have to and so the answer to your
question is yes but that's what it'll
take I watched what musk did with
Twitter with great interest and I've
watched a number of leaders at a variety
of Corporations do something similar and
Revitalize their their respective
companies you know it it's a it's often
a lengthy process and you have to be a
very particular sort of person to do it
and I think people hope that Trump can
do it but but here's a danger that I see
even in what you just said I understand
your concern and I'm very sympathetic to
it I know that since time
immemorial the the evil brother of the
rightful King has posed a archetypal
threat to the Integrity of the state
abetted by the blindness of the King
right and that the archetypal story is
that that descends into stasis and then
chaos and I feel that everyone feels
that that's what's happening but there's
another phenomenon that emerges when all
that occurs and that phenomenon has been
s symbolized as the dragon that eats its
own pale that's the symbol of chaos
that's uros and the fervor with which
you just described that potentially
destructive
process the reason I'm pointing about
out at that symbol is because there's an
element of it that's similar to what the
radicals on the left say you know that
everything has to be burned to the
ground that it has to be decimated that
we have to start a new and I can see the
critical conservatives and Libertarians
such as yourself
inadvertently Accidentally In some ways
and even inevitably adopting the same
dire prognosis right
so what's the difference between your
view of creative destruction let's say
this is a very hard question what's your
the difference between your view of
creative destruction and the left this
view that our institutions are
terminally corrupt that we have to raise
them to the ground and and start a new
sure so I think that there is a
different vision of what you create to
fill the vacuum and what you've seen
from the modern left is actually the
very bureaucracies that they've they've
created right this vestage of
bureaucracy the committee class is
indeed the product of what has
cannibalized the institutions that once
existed so we're not starting from a
neutral starting point that's what I
would say if we were starting from a
neutral starting point we would start
with a blank slate and ask what we need
to build a new we need to get to that
blank slate we're not even at that start
line right now and so in some ways I
think the overgrowth of that managerial
class and that bureaucracy has itself
been weaponized by the left that their
tactics are no longer ones that say tear
it down their tactics are weaponize
what's already there to advance your
ends right they're not tearing down the
financial system the question is how do
you weaponize the financial system to
advance your own substantive end
they're not tearing down the
prosecutorial or justice system the
question is how do you weaponize that
justice system to go after your own
political opponents and keep them from
running against you in elections they're
not tearing down Corporate America
they're leveraging Corporate America
okay so what you're pointing to there is
the falseness is the falseness of that
revolutionary claim that that's window
dressing for acquisition of power and
the and the use of the current of the
current systems the systems that they
purport to despise yes it's either a
falseness Dr Peterson or it is a modern
incarnation of the left that's different
from the kind that existed when KL Marx
existed so or even when Bernie Sanders
existed for that matter right even when
even then when Bernie Sanders existed
for that matter exactly it's it's a
particularly new strain of the left
that's a little bit different from the
Occupy Wall Street let's tear it down
version this isn't that anymore they
sort of I think in their you if you
can't beat them join them became the
mentality and don't do if you can't
really tear it down through if you can't
invade the castle through the front door
you couldn't tear it down through the
front door just invade it and infest it
from the black back door and that's
actually what's happened okay so you
were you had a Clarion call to
leadership as you pointed out at the
beginning of this interview because you
believed that the the fundamental
institutions upon which this country
your country are predicated are are
they're they're on the money they're on
the money right and so the path forward
that I've seen for the conservative
types is to see what the leftists want
to do let's say they let's talk about
the ones who do want to tear it down
they want to tear down the existing
system and they want to rebuild it in
accordance with the dictates of
something approximating the radical left
vision of Marx let's say radical
egalitarian ISM that could extend even
to the notion that something like
property is theft so they're going to
tear things down and they're going to
rebuild it on on those principles now
you guys in the United States you
already have a set of principles and one
of them is the principle of distributed
responsibility right and so and that's
the
age-old medication that's offered when
tyranny looms and Chaos beckons it's
that it's you don't fall prey to either
of those and you don't fall prey to the
dynamic you reinvent at the institutions
of distributed responsibility now you've
been pointing in that direction right
because you've taken a pro family Pro
patriotic
pro-america um Pro West right and I
don't know what you know where it goes
beyond that whether you're an
Enlightenment guy and and and how you
view the interaction between all of that
and the underlying judeo-christian
Foundation let's say
but your your call and I'm hoping this
is the case for Trump too is your isn't
merely to decimate it's to clear the
path so that what's true and right can
make itself manifest again which is what
for example what musk was trying to do
and I think did successfully at Twitter
he he got rid of 75% of the employees
right but he wasn't trying to decimate
the company he was trying to establish
it
on he was trying to establish ferle
ground yeah exactly exactly and so the
decimate it is the overgrowth I want to
be really clear about this is right
that's good to be very clear about that
yeah is is is to is to tear down the
cancerous overgrowth itself so I'm
saying we're not trying to treat this
tumor with symptomatic therapy right we
want to we want to we want to decimate
the tumor but the underlying organ is
still what we want to save okay and I
think that that's that's actually really
okay so let me ask you about this tell
me what you think about this like look
you were attacked a lot and you said
that one of the consequences of that was
that well it got your your backup let's
say and some of that was contaminated
with a certain amount of disdain and we
already walked through that and but you
also pointed out something uh that's
relevant in this context which is that
the slings and arrows that were directed
towards you are relatively trivial in
comparison to the comp continual utter
assault on Trump at every every level of
his life virtually and so my fear let's
say is that he's so embattled and so
pushed into a corner and so poked and
prodded and provoked that he is he wise
enough to separate his desire
to clear away the overgrowth and let
what's healthy survive or is he pushed
into a corner enough so that that there
are enemies everywhere and his wrath
will know no bounds let's say so what do
you think about them and you've got to
know him a bit and like yeah so here's
what I will say is is is is the man I've
seen is I I'll reveal maybe two insights
that are a little bit different from the
media portrayals but true to my
understanding of what I see one is I see
a leader who
is even more ambitious for the
country as a consequence of some of his
learnings from the first term I think
the first term was incredibly successful
look you got four years of trump four
years of Biden compare the results and
make your vote accordingly and if that's
the way this election goes I think Trump
will be elected as the next president
but I don't think he views that as
sufficient I think that he believes that
there are a lot of lessons learned from
that first Administration that he is
ambitious for our country to want to
translate in that second term I think
that's a real positive because that to
me signals growth and it signals actual
positivity towards the future to say
that there's a lot of things that I will
still have learned from that first term
and that's an advantage he has relative
to anybody else who ran for president is
he actually has those learnings from
having been in that office even relative
to me with a very similar Vision he's
faced down that administrative state in
a way that I've studied and have deep
intuitions and knowledge about but
haven't faced in the same way that he
has and the second thing that I've noted
about him is it this is in the last
couple of months but he is very
receptive to the best Arguments for how
to do that as long as I think they're
delivered in the right digestible way
that's e efficient and effective and
thoughtful around him I don't think he
has patience for long driveling of of
you know anyone's oral diarrhea on a
given day but if delivered in a pointed
way I think that he is actually very
open-minded to adopting ideas that
weren't necessarily part of his agenda
previously but if they're aligned with
the actual vision and their ways of
specific policies or specific actions to
take that help Advance the right America
First Vision for the country he's
actually very receptive to that and the
media portrays him as some sort of
dogmatic single-minded man that's not
what I see actually I see a leader who
actually cares about the country who
wants the best and brightest to give him
and arm him with the tools he needs to
turn that Vision into reality I mean
this is one publicly reported example so
you know I'll feel free to talk about it
I want to be respectful of the
conversations I've had with him
separately but since this was publicly
reported I can speak to it is you know I
was backstage with him in New Hampshire
this is after I dropped out and endorsed
him and we spoke about the Perils of a
central bank digital currency and you
you and I may have talked about this in
other occasions I trust that you're
familiar with some of those perils
coming from the Canadian side of this
yeah yeah I'm I'm plenty familiar with
them all so so what I what I admired
about Donald Trump is he had on one hand
an intellectual humility about him he
didn't try to pretend to do what I know
many politicians would do would try to
recite some talking points they briefly
memorized without understanding what the
actual thing was he has the
self-confidence to say well tell me
about what that is and tell me about why
it's bad well great that's actually an
honest conversation to get to here's
what it is here's why it's bad and then
he also asked the further question of
well then why are the advocates in favor
of it right understand the best argument
for the other side it's not just okay
this is what I'm supposed to say so let
me digest it what is the argument for
the other side so we went through that
and he didn't immediately adopt it right
he asked a coule coup of other people
for their views went on stage that night
didn't talk about it that night but a
few nights later we're in New Hampshire
and lo and behold and he didn't talked
to me about this beforehand he comes out
in his speech he he references my
conversation with me backstage in his
speech to the audience from a few nights
before and says I will tell you tonight
that I am against a central bank digital
currency and here's why and the audience
cheered and he had his own conviction in
why he was offering it for something
that even a matter of days before and it
wasn't flippant he took a couple of days
he understood the best Arguments for the
other side he consulted other people as
well in the process and then came to a
decisive answer that to me is a mark of
a leader that isn't just behaving in a
reactionary response which is what your
concern was as expressed but somebody
who is able to Think Through the right
arguments to make sure the right
policies are actually advancing the
agenda rather than just reflecting
whatever Direction The Winds of temper
are blowing on a given day and I think
that that
that's really encouraging it encourages
me and I think it should encourage every
American and certainly every person
who's voting for Donald Trump or every
person who's open to voting for Donald
Trump to know that that's actually what
I think they're going to get and I do
think it's going to take
a i a responsibility of people around
him to provide that to him in a way that
allows him to lead but you know I think
I'm going to do my part and I think the
other people around him are going to do
Theirs to hopefully make that second
term far more successful than what was
already I think a very good first ter
okay so let me close with one final
question so when I was watching the
Republican primary know I was hoping
initially that public opinion would fall
behind DeSantis because I thought
DeSantis has a credible pro-american
truly conservative vision and he has
administrative experience and the reason
that I personally I'm only speaking
personally and as a Canadian you know
preferred DeSantis to Trump is because
the the divisiveness that surrounds
Trump makes me very apprehensive and
this is independent of his merits as a
person and as a businessman perhaps even
as a
president Trump the phenomenon of trump
polarizes people to a degree that I
think is unparalleled it's unparalleled
in my memory in what and having watched
the political scene for like five
decades you know so I would like you to
tell me why you think that polarization
is so intense
and what you
think see because the the the the the
real critical part of me thinks and I'm
not saying I'm right about this but the
Trump presidency the Trump phenomena is
so divisive that I think the
divisiveness itself poses a threat to
the Integrity of the country now and I
thought that okay so so separate two
things there one is does divisiveness
itself just irrespective of trump does
divisiveness itself represent a threat
to this country of course it does I
think this country is skating on thin
ice we're at risk of dividing to a
breaking point I put a lot of that in
the media I put a lot of that in the
industrialization of politics I put a
lot of that in the super pack puppet
Mastery that characterizes modern
politics I think that you shouldn't have
congressmen who are I think you need
term limits I think congressmen should
not be able to trade individual stocks I
think that the administrative state
needs term limits I think the people who
we elect to run the government should
actually run the government those are
things that left or right people agree
on in this country policies that you get
to speak your mind openly as long as I
get to in return inherently most people
in their value set are not actually
divided but is the projection the
artifice of division created but by the
projection of the media that creates the
appearance of division that then becomes
the new reality so that's where I think
it's actually coming from and then Trump
is Trump the treatment of trump is
really just a symptom of that the media
puts him in in such a box to create a
caricature of a man that is part of the
broader project of division they're
creating irrespective of trump they've
just used Trump as another vehicle in
achieving the divide and conquer
strategy of a small group of people who
benefit from that division okay so you
think for example I don't want to put
words in your mouth but your sense would
would have been for example that had
disantis emerged as the Republican
leader instead of trump that the same
forces would have turned him into
another Trump let's say in the public
imagination that this is actually a
consequence I don't think that I don't
think that any other person you know you
know you know DeSantis or anyone else
would have been a cure to the problem
that you're concerned about now do I see
an opportunity to level up as a movement
and say we're not just against what the
other side puts up which is a temptation
but to say this is what we're actually
running to these are our affirmative
values of what we stand for right what
is the opposite of the great reset
sovereignty sovereignty at the level of
the individual and the family and the
nation and God that's what it means to
be a conservative that's what grounds
our shared American values that's that's
our identity well that's the identity
that can be offered confused young
people right subsidiary identity and as
a leader I'm leading you there yes I see
that opportunity and you know even in
the last couple of months and I want to
respect a all the conversations we've
had but in the last couple of months one
of the things that Donald Trump has said
that I
think inspires me and I hope inspires
people across this country is you know
what our Vengeance will be success will
be our Vengeance success is unifying and
so I see the earliest direction of us
beginning to go in a direction he said
that did he that's that's a good line
that's a good line I agree with you on
that I I very much agree with you on
that and I think that that is a unifying
message success is unifying and as he
said it success is our Vengeance well
that's the Vengeance that you Americans
took against the Soviet Union yes in
many ways even against the British
Empire in the American Revolution in in
some ways but very much against the
Soviet Union in the Cold War success was
our Vengeance against against that enemy
and success can be our Vengeance even
against the enemy that we face of our
own Division and so I think that I am
cautiously optimistic that we may be
stronger on the other side of this
division as a bone heals stronger after
it is broken yes the bone of our
identity has been broken but it can
emerge stronger on the other side and
for the next four years this may not
just be a four-year project for the next
four years I believe Donald Trump is the
best positioned person to lead us there
I think it is the respons his
responsibility and the responsibility of
people around him to make sure he's as
successful as he can be in getting us
there but it's not just a foure project
it took us 30 years to get to where we
are right now with the assault on our
institutions and our national identity
and our national division it could very
well take more than four years to find
our way out of it to be stronger on the
other side but for the next four years
I'm optimistic that this can be the
beginning of a step in that direction
well that's a very good place to stop um
thank you very much for speaking with me
again and making your experiences
available to everyone who's watching and
listening um I wish you the best of luck
NE negotiating these uh very complex
high waters over the next few months
it's going to be fascinating to watch
this unfold um I think we decided the
last time we last couple of times we
spoke to check in every four months or
something like that I think we should
keep doing that as this progresses so
that everybody can stay of what's yeah
yeah and useful a fun for me actually
good good good good well in Good
Luck helping promote that positive and
unifying Vision like that's it would be
lovely if Trump's campaign could turn
more and more to that as he's
simultaneously defending himself from
the multi-dimensional assaults that
assail him but that vision of
distributed responsibility that is the
time tested antidote to tyranny and
slavery right and it is the fundamental
realization of governance that your
country is founded on that principle of
subsidiarity and it's such a great Call
to Adventure for young people it's like
take your place in a marriage take your
place in a family take your place in a
community bear a load you know all the
responsibility you abdicate personally
will be taken up and used against you by
tyrants that's the iron law of humanity
right and so that's a great thing for
everyone to understand and I'm hoping
the conservatives can run with that you
know because there isn't another pathway
forward that isn't chaos and tyranny so
I'm hopeful and I promise you I'll do
everything in my power to make it
so all right sir to everyone watching
and listening um thank you very much for
your time and attention to the film crew
here in Toronto today um thank you guys
for setting this up uh to everybody
who's watching and listening your time
and attention is much appreciated I hope
you found the conversation useful and
revealing and be it's always a pleasure
talking to you and uh you know keep the
flag flying man thank you I appreciate
it take care
[Music]